Once around, comet Holmes.
So, comet Holmes was discovered by Edwin
Holmes during an observation session of
the Andromeda galaxy back on the 6th of
November of 1892.
So, it's been known for over a hundred
years.
And in this uh image that we have here,
you can see the Andromeda galaxy with
its satellite galaxies up to the top
right of the image there. And down at
the bottom, the very bright blob, which
is the comet.
And we think that he probably discovered
Comet Holmes because it had suddenly
become rather brighter with some sort of
outburst. And that's very interesting
because we've seen it do it again.
Now the orbit of the comet was soon
worked out by Croitz and S to be an
elliptical orbit taking it from just
beyond the orbit of Mars at two
astronomical units twice the Earth's sun
distance out to 5.2 which is nearly the
orbit of Jupiter
and taking just under seven years 6.9
years for the period for the orbit. Now
that means that the next time it comes
in close to the sun, the perihelion
point will be the 13th of June of 2028.
So just a couple of years and we should
see this comet brightening again. Here's
a little animation of the orbit slightly
tilted to that of the plane of the solar
system going around the sun very much
under the influence of the planet
Jupiter. a Jupiter family comet. It's
the gravity of Jupiter that is corelling
its orbit to arrive round about that
five astronomical unit point at the uh
outside there and uh then swing into the
inner solar system taking a period that
uh is almost half that of Jupiter.
Now, what really brought this to my
attention was that I saw it back in
2007.
On the night of the 23rd and 24th of
October, the comet suddenly brightened
up from dim obscurity at magnitude 17,
so faint that you had no chance of
seeing it, all the way up to magnitude
three, becoming one of the brightest
objects in the constellation of Perseus
uh in a fairly short period of time,
just 48 hours to make this enormous
increase in brightness. It became easily
visible to the naked eye and with
binoculars it was just stunning. I was
actually on holiday in the Caribbean at
the time uh under some very dark skies
and able to wield my trusty binoculars
which I always take with me and uh get
some fantastic views and uh even
entertain quite a few of the other hotel
guests to a look at this amazing
suddenly brightened comet.
Now, it took a path through Perseus,
looping around, as you can see in the
little animation there, gradually
changing its brightness, expanding and
getting larger but fainter through the
constellation over the period of weeks
that we were able to observe it. And
I've got another diagram of that here.
So showing that uh the brightening
occurred at the beginning there around
about the 23rd, 4th, 5th of October and
then it gradually increased in uh
apparent size, brightening and becoming
quite spectacular right through until
the size had increased so much that it
began to fade away in the spring of that
year in February and March as the light
became more and more diffuse and lost
into the background.
Quite an amazing thing to watch. Now,
it's estimated that it's got a
modestsized nucleus, 3.4 kilometers in
diameter, the little tiny dirty snowball
in the center. but that during the
outburst
the coma the envelope around the comet
expanded to over a million kilometers
and in fact became larger than the sun.
So the one of the largest extended
objects in the solar system although
there are several structures that uh
people claim like the magnetic field of
Jupiter as being larger but I'm not sure
that a magnetic field is really uh a
physical structure in the same way.
Anyway, truly amazing and you can see in
the picture there 10 arc minutes across
uh that is a sixth of a degree. So
compare that to the size of the full
moon which is 30 ark minutes and uh you
will see that this was really quite a
big object on the sky.
Now this attracted enormous amounts of
astronomical attention and some
telescopes zoomed in to try to work out
what was going on. And perhaps the best
picture is this one. This is the core of
the comet deep inside there with the uh
shock wave and the envelope around it
calculated by looking at a number of
images and doing what's called a LLAS
transform on them which has brought out
the detailed structure of what was going
on very very much into the central
region there showing that the comet had
in fact fragmented into quite a number
of separate comet fragments that were
breaking away from the main core as well
as the enormous eruption of dust and gas
forming the coma around it. And nowadays
when we look back and trace comet homes,
we can see the main comet and fragments
from it and the dust trail reconverging
as all of their individual orbits which
are now drifting apart under the
influence of the gravitational
pertubations of the planets and the
effect of the solar wind pushing on
them. They're gradually separating and
moving offline, but their orbits have a
a crossing at the original
eruption site. Now, the image at the top
there is a recent image of comet homes
itself. The bright point with the black
shadow there, that is the comet. And the
black shadow is the dust trail leading
off to the right on the image. And then
at the bottom we can see a highly
enhanced picture showing many of the
small comet fragments and a faint belt
running diagonally which is the comet
dust.
So this was an amazing thing. The
question before us really is what
happened?
Can we identify the
reason why this comet suddenly had this
enormous outburst and indeed created
this shower of separate fragments. And I
love the animation on the right again
built with that LLAS transform of a
series of images showing how the coma
expanded and how the fragments
internally uh were beginning to separate
but not as fast as the expansion of the
main envelope. So was this a collision
between objects in the asteroid belt?
Perhaps comet Holmes crashed into a
small asteroid. Perhaps a large meteor
traveling at high speed in a different
direction. This could have been a slow
speed impact of two large bodies or a
head-on smash with something much
smaller. Other theories are that it was
just the warming of the material caused
by the
heat from the sun
generating a buildup of gas pressure in
a deep pocket inside the comet that
suddenly managed to crack the surface
and explode out in a huge uh outburst.
And some have suggested that this was
water being melted internally uh forming
at a high pressure water vapor inside
the comet that then burst forth into
space. And there certainly was a lot of
water visible. But that's not really a
surprise because we think that comets
are essentially dirty snowballs. So what
really happened? I think it's likely
that this was a collision. Collisions
are entirely possible in the asteroid
belt. Fairly rare and we haven't seen
other objects like this. But who knows?
Unless we are able to send a space probe
and understand this better by getting up
close and personal to the main
fragments, maybe we'll be able to learn
a bit more about what caused this. But
it is interesting
that the discovery of the image by
Edward Holmes back in 1892
was probably at a magnitude that
suggested a previous outburst.
Two collisions seems unlikely. So maybe
it really was the gas pressure or a
water explosion idea. Um it's just uh
fascinating. And I hope you've enjoyed
that little look at comet homes, an
event which I witnessed and uh was very
very uh much keen on looking at through
my binoculars uh under the dark skies
out there in the Caribbean when it was
at its peak. Uh so thanks very much for
that one.